updated draft (#2)
WebAssembly/wasi-keyvalue: README.md

# WASI Key-Value Store

A proposed [WebAssembly System Interface](https://github.com/WebAssembly/WASI) API.

### Current Phase

Phase 1

### Champions
- Dan Chiarlone
- David Justice
- Jiaxiao Zhou

### Phase 4 Advancement Criteria

At least two independent production implementations.

At least two cloud provider implementations.

Implementations available for at least Windows, Linux & MacOS.

A testsuite that passes on the platforms and implementations mentioned above.

## Table of Contents [if the explainer is longer than one printed page]

- [[WASI Key-Value Store]](#wasi-key-value-store)
    - [Current Phase](#current-phase)
    - [Champions](#champions)

>     - [Phase 4 Advancement Criteria](#phase-4-advancement-criteria)

Author: I think this is intended to describe phase 4 advancement criteria.

  - [Table of Contents [if the explainer is longer than one printed page]](#table-of-contents-if-the-explainer-is-longer-than-one-printed-page)
    - [Introduction](#introduction)
    - [Goals [or Motivating Use Cases, or Scenarios]](#goals-or-motivating-use-cases-or-scenarios)
    - [Non-goals](#non-goals)
    - [API walk-through](#api-walk-through)
      - [[Use case 1]](#use-case-1)
    - [Detailed design discussion](#detailed-design-discussion)
      - [[Tricky design choice #1]](#tricky-design-choice-1)
      - [[Tricky design choice 2]](#tricky-design-choice-2)
    - [Considered alternatives](#considered-alternatives)
      - [[Alternative 1]](#alternative-1)
      - [[Alternative 2]](#alternative-2)
    - [Stakeholder Interest & Feedback](#stakeholder-interest--feedback)
    - [References & acknowledgements](#references--acknowledgements)

### Introduction

WASI Key-Value Store is a WASI API primarily for accessing a key-value datastore. It has functions to

> 1. retrive the value stored and associated with a key
> 2. delete the value stored and associated with a key
> 3. create and update a key-value pair

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. retrieve the value stored and associated with a key,
2. delete a key-value pair, and
3. create and update a key-value pair.
```

> The API is designed to hide data-plane differences between different key-value stores. It's control-plane behaviors, including cluster management, data consistency, replication, and sharding, are not specified, and are provider specific.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The API is designed to hide data-plane differences between different key-value stores. The control-plane behavior/functionality (e.g., including cluster management, data consistency, replication, and sharding) are not specified, and are provider specific.
```

> ### Goals [or Motivating Use Cases, or Scenarios]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Goals
```

The primary goal of this API is to allow users to use WASI programs to access key-value stores. It abstracts away the complexity of building stateful services that need to access key-value stores. In other words, it decouples the application code from the specific key-value store APIs. This allows WASI programs to be portable across different key-value store that supports this interface, be it on-prem, in the cloud, or in edge devices.

The second goal of this API is to abstract away the network stack, allowing applications that need to access key-value stores to not worry about what network protocol is used to access the key-value store.

### Non-goals

- Cover all application requirements for a key-value store. Instead, it focuses on the most common use cases. It allows providers to extend the API to support more use cases.
- Data consistency.
- Data replication.
- Data sharding.
- Cluster management.
- Monitoring

### API walk-through

#### [Use case 1]

> Imagine you have a HTTP handler that needs to persistent some data to a persistent key-value store. The handler needs to be able to retrieve the data from the key-value store, and update the data in the key-value store. The handler also needs to be able to delete the data from the key-value store. The following rust code shows how you can use the WASI Key-Value Store API to in the handler.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Imagine you have an HTTP handler that needs to persist some data to a key-value store. The handler needs to be able to retrieve, delete, and update the data in the key-value store. The following Rust code shows how you can use the WASI Key-Value Store API to in the handler.
```

```rust
let value = b"spiderlightning";

> kv1::put("key", value)?;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
kv1::set("key", value)?;
```

(?)

Author: changed it to `create_or_update`

```go
interface "wasi:kv/data/crud" {
  use { Error, payload, payload_stream } from "wasi:kv/types"

	get: func(key: string) -> result<payload_stream, Error>

  put: func(key: string, value: payload_stream) -> result<_, Error>

  del: func(key: string) -> result<_, Error>
}

interface "wasi:kv/data/increment" {
  use { Error, payload, payload_stream } from "wasi:kv/types"
  
	incr: func(key: string) -> result<u64, Error>
}

interface "wasi:kv/data/bulk-get" {
  use { Error, payload, payload_stream } from "wasi:kv/types"
  
	bulk-get: func(keys: stream<string>) -> result<stream<(key, payload_stream)>, Error>

  keys: func() -> result<future<list<string>>, Error>
}

interface "wasi:kv/data/bulk-put" {
  use { Error, payload, payload_stream } from "wasi:kv/types"
  
	bulk-put: func(key_values: stream<(string, payload)>) -> result<unit, Error>
}

interface "wasi:kv/data/ttl" {
  use { Error, payload, payload_stream } from "wasi:kv/types"
  
	put-with-ttl: func(key: string, value: payload, ttl: u64) -> result<unit, Error>
}

interface "wasi:kv/data/query" { 
  ...
}

interface "wasi:kv/types" {
	resource Error { ... }

  type payload_stream = stream<u8>
	type payload = list<u8>

> }

Reviewer: For record-keeping sake, I'm copy-pasting the feedback I gave prior.

> - Why make the get function return a `payload_stream` rather than just a `future<payload>`?
> - I noticed you changed set to `put` in the crud interface, but not for the `bulk-*` interfaces. Is that an oversight? > I'd probably just recommend keeping it as `set`...
> - For `bulk-get`, do we really want a list of streams or should one stream be enough (perhaps streaming a list of payloads...?)?
> - Why separate the two `bulk-*` functions into two interfaces and not just make a single `bulk` interface?

~most of these have been addressed already ✔️

Author: Copy-and-pasted my comments on this question:

- There are some document stores, such as MongoDB and DynamoDB, can store a JSON file for a key as value. This means that the value from get could be pretty big. It makes more sense to get a stream of u8 instead of waiting for a future of payload to come. If you take a look at Luke's presentation on HTTP Body type, it is also defined as a stream. The biggest difference between stream and future is that stream is list of futures.

- For clarity, I changed the name to `create_or_update`. I am very flexible on the naming of the APIs. Let me know if you have any other suggestions!

- Done

- I've seen some datastores only support bulk-get, but not bulk-set

```

```go
world "wasi:cloud/services" {
		import kv: {*: "wasi:cloud/kv"}
    import mq: {*: "wasi:cloud/mq"}
    ...

    export http: "wasi:http/handler"
}

world "wasi:cloud/kv" {
  import kv: {*: "wasi:kv/data/crud"}
  
  export http: "wasi:http/handler"
}
```

> #### [Tricky design choice #1]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Tricky design choice 1
```

The second goal of this API is to abstract away the network stack, allowing applications that need to access key-value stores to not worry about what network protocol is used to access the key-value store.

### Non-goals

- Cover all application requirements for a key-value store. Instead, it focuses on the most common use cases. It allows providers to extend the API to support more use cases.
- Data consistency.
- Data replication.
- Data sharding.
- Cluster management.
- Monitoring

### API walk-through

#### Use case 1

Imagine you have an HTTP handler that needs to persist some data to a key-value store. The handler needs to be able to retrieve, delete, and update the data in the key-value store. The following Rust code shows how you can use the WASI Key-Value Store API to in the handler.

```rust
let value = b"spiderlightning";
kv1::create_or_update("key", value)?;
let val = kv1::get("key")?;
assert_eq!(val, value);

kv1::delete("key")?;
```

### Detailed design discussion

```go
interface "wasi:kv/data/crud" {
  use { Error, payload, key } from "wasi:kv/types"

  get: func(key: key) -> result<payload, Error>

>   create-or-update: func(key: key, value: stream<u8>) -> result<_, Error>

Reviewer 2: This is unusual terminology outside of Azure APIs, and might imply more complex semantics in some systems. Suggest `set` (or `put` or `insert`).

Author: seems reasonable, I changed it to set

  delete: func(key: key) -> result<_, Error>
}

interface "wasi:kv/data/increment" {
  use { Error, key } from "wasi:kv/types"
  
  increment: func(key: key) -> result<u64, Error>
}

interface "wasi:kv/data/bulk-get" {
  use { Error, payload } from "wasi:kv/types"
  
  bulk-get: func(keys: keys) -> result<stream<payload>, Error>

  keys: func() -> result<keys, Error>
}

> interface "wasi:kv/data/bulk-put" {

Reviewer 2: ...you even call it `put` here...

The second goal of this API is to abstract away the network stack, allowing applications that need to access key-value stores to not worry about what network protocol is used to access the key-value store.

### Non-goals

- Cover all application requirements for a key-value store. Instead, it focuses on the most common use cases. It allows providers to extend the API to support more use cases.
- Transactional semantics.
- Data consistency.
- Data replication.
- Data sharding.
- Cluster management.
- Monitoring

### API walk-through

#### Use case 1

Imagine you have an HTTP handler that needs to persist some data to a key-value store. The handler needs to be able to retrieve, delete, and update the data in the key-value store. The following Rust code shows how you can use the WASI Key-Value Store API to in the handler.

```rust
let value = b"value1";
kv1::create_or_update("key", value)?;
let val = kv1::get("key")?;
assert_eq!(val, value);

kv1::delete("key")?;
```

### Detailed design discussion

```go

> interface "wasi:kv/data/crud" {

Reviewer 3: For broader audience awareness I think we should avoid the acronym `crud`. While many of us know what create-retrieve-update-delete (crud) means, it might not be all that culturally transferrable.

Since this interface exposes the "basic" read/write functionality, perhaps change it to `wasi:kv/data/basic` or `wasi:kv/data/readwrite` etc.

  use { Error, payload, key } from "wasi:kv/types"

  get: func(key: key) -> result<payload, Error>

  create-or-update: func(key: key, value: stream<u8>) -> result<_, Error>

  delete: func(key: key) -> result<_, Error>
}

> interface "wasi:kv/data/increment" {

Reviewer 3: I think the main reason why this is a separate interface is for atomic operations. The slide deck presentation shows the `wasi:kv/data/atomic` interface. I'd rather see the atomic interface with an operation called `increment` (we don't need the short `incr` , names are cheap).

Author: yeah the PR is out of date. I will create the increment name to atomic to sync with the slides.

  use { Error, key } from "wasi:kv/types"
  
  increment: func(key: key) -> result<u64, Error>
}

> interface "wasi:kv/data/bulk-get" {

Reviewer 3: It might be easier if we have an interface called `wasi:kv/data/bulk` which has the `get` and `put` operations (this is an aside, but within an interface we shouldn't need to prefix the operations with an interface, so `bulk-get` doesn't need the bulk and should just be `get` imho).

Realistically, I think a kv implementation either supports "bulk operations" or not... I've rarely, if ever, seen a data store support bulk reads without bulk writes or the reverse

Reviewer 3: e.g. if you have a `get-many` inside the `atomic` interface, you know that the result set will not be alterable during the query, whereas `get-many` inside the basic interface would imply no such guarantee.

Author: I've changed bulk-get and bulk-set to get-many and set-many. To make it clear to distinguish atomic operation or non-atomic operation, I've also created a new interface "wasi:kv/data/transaction" for atomic `bulk-get` and `bulk-set`.

  use { Error, payload } from "wasi:kv/types"
  
  bulk-get: func(keys: keys) -> result<stream<payload>, Error>

  keys: func() -> result<keys, Error>
}

interface "wasi:kv/data/bulk-put" {
  use { Error, key } from "wasi:kv/types"
  
  bulk-create-or-update: func(key_values: stream<(key, stream<u8>)>) -> result<_, Error>
}

> interface "wasi:kv/data/ttl" {

Reviewer 3: I'd rather see ttl as an option on put in the basic interface than a separate interface for just ttl.

Author: I agree with you on that an extra interface for ttl seems redundent. The concern for adding ttl to the basic operation interface is that it makes the interface less general and forces users to either opt-out the ttl parameter by providing a `None` value or not.

Author: I've moved the ttl interface to "under discssion" section.
